Votes
==

|            | 7813 |
|------------|------|------|------|------|
|ais523      | F    | F    | F    | F    |
|aranea      | F    | F    | F    | F    |
|G.          | FF   | FF   | AA   | FF   |
|Murphy      | P    | P    | F    | F    |
|Nichdel     | F    | F    | F    | F    |
|Tekneek     | A    | F    | F    | F    |
|Walker      | F    | F    | F    | F    |
|------------|------|------|------|------|
|For/Against | 6/1  | 7/0  | 6/2  | 8/0  |
|AI          | 1.0  | 3.0  | 1.0  | 3.0  |
|Voters      | 7    | 7    | 7    | 7    |
|Quorum      | 4    | 4    | 4    | 4    |
|PASSES      | T    | T    | T    | T    |

Passed Proposals
==

/////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////


ID: 7809
Title: Quill and Tournaments
Adoption index: 1.0
Author: G.
Co-author(s):

[Make this annual, not semi-annual]

Amend Rule 2444 (Silver Quill) to read:

      The Silver Quill is an annual award designed to honor the
      authors of proposals of outstanding merit and influence on the
      game.

      In a timely fashion after the end of each Agoran Year, the Herald
      SHALL initiate and Agoran Decision to determine which Proposal
      has most greatly influenced that (ending) year of play.

      For this decision, the valid options are all proposals adopted
      between November 1 of the year prior to the ending year, and
      October 31 of the ending year.  The vote collector is the
      Herald, and the voting method is instant runoff.

      Players are ENCOURAGED to discuss which eligible proposals best
      satisfy the aforementioned criteria.  Proposals submitted by new
      players SHOULD be given somewhat higher weight, but the primary
      reference should be the proposals themselves and their effect on
      the game since adoption.

      Upon the resolution of the decision, if the outcome is not
      FAILED QUORUM and there were at least three votes containing it
      in any preference slot, that proposal wins the Ceremony, and the
      Herald is authorized to award its author the Patent Title of
      "Silver Quill YYYY, substituting the ending year; otherwise,
      there is no winner.


[Add a different sort of thing for the Birthday]

Create the following Rule, Tournaments, power=1:

      A Tournament is a sub-game of Agora specifically sanctioned
      to be initiated as a tournament by the Rules.  If a winner of a
      tournament is determined within 4 weeks of its initiation, that
      person or persons win the game, otherwise the tournament
      concludes with no winner.

      In a timely fashion after the start of June 1 of each year,
      the Herald SHALL propose a set of Regulations governing a
      Birthday Tournament for that year; the Herald CAN also
      delegate the responsibility for creating or running the
      tournament to another player, with that player's consent.

      The Birthday Tournament's regulations SHOULD be such that all
      persons who choose to participate have a fair chance of winning
      the tournament (according to its regulations), and a winner
      SHOULD be expected within 2-3 weeks following the tournament's
      initiation.

      After adequate time for discussion of the Birthday Tournament's
      regulations, the Herald (or delegate) CAN initiate a sanctioned
      tournament with a specified, finalized set of regulations, Without
      3 Objections.  The initiation SHOULD be timed to coincide with
      Agora's Birthday.

//////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////

ID: 7810
Title: Cleerer Registrar Responsibilities
Adoption index: 3.0
Author: nichdel
Co-author(s):

Amend Rule 2139 to read:

     The Registrar is an office; its holder is responsible for
     keeping track of players.

     The Registrar's weekly report includes:

     a) A list of all players, including information sufficient to
        identify and contact each player.

     b) The date on which each player most recently became a player.

     c) For each forum with non-Foreign publicity, sufficient
        instructions for players to receive messages there.

     The Registrar's monthly report includes:

     a) For each former player for which the information is
        reasonably available, the dates on which e registered and
        deregistered.

     In the first week of every month the Registrar SHALL attempt to
     deregister every player that has not sent a message to a public
     forum in the preceding month.

     The Registrar's duties and abilities also include:

     * Changing the publicity of a forum, as described in Rule 478.

     * Publishing Cantus Cygnei and Writs of FAGE as described in
       Rule 1789.

     The Registrar is also responsible for tracking any switches that
     would otherwise lack an officer to track them, unless the switch
     is defined as untracked.

Amend Rule 869 by removing the following text:

     In the first week of every month, the Registrar SHALL use this
     method to attempt to deregister every player that has not sent a
     message to a public forum in the preceding month.

Amend Rule 478 by removing the following text:

     The Registrar's report includes, for each forum with non-Foreign
     publicity, sufficient instructions for players to receive
     messages there.

[The first in a series of proposals that aim to make it possible to know
what an office does from just reading their rule.

There are only two intentional mechanical changes: 1) a new monthly
report with historical information. 2) Less specific about how the
Registrar deregisters players. The latter is meant to be more
future-proof.

Currently I intend to rewrite other offices similarly. First listing
weekly and monthly reports, then other timed events, then misc.]

//////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////

ID: 7811
Title: Winning by apathy
Adoption index: 1.0
Author: ais523
Co-author(s):

Create a new rule "Victory by Apathy" with power 0.3:

      A player CAN Declare Apathy without objection, specifying a set of
      players. Upon doing so, the specified players win the game.

//////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////

ID: 7812
Title: Persons Can Win
Adoption index: 3.0
Author: G.
Co-author(s):

Amend Rule 2449 (Winning the Game) to read:

      When the Rules state that a person or persons win the game,
      those persons win the game; specifically they win the Round
      that ends with the indicated win.  Agora itself does not end and
      the ruleset remains unchanged. The Herald is then authorized to
      award those persons the Patent Title of Champion.

[just substitutes player[s] with person[s]].

//////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
